>>GAIL RUBEN: Today
we're going to talk
about what you need
to know before you go
so that when-- not if, but when
there's a death in the family,
you can get through the
process with much less conflict
and stress.
That's all starting today on
"Beyond Belief" right now.
[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
You just heard it from
Gail Ruben, a subject
that not a lot of people want
to talk about-- death, dying.
Even though we're all
going to get there, Gail.
One way or another.
>>RUBEN: Humans have
a 100% mortality rate.
>>NOORY: I hope the
trip for many of us
is much longer than
shorter, don't you?
>>RUBEN: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Why are so many people
afraid of talking about death,
first and foremost?
>>RUBEN: There's this idea
that if I talk about it,
it's going to happen
sooner rather than later.
And that is not true.
And part of it is
our self-esteem,
the idea that within
ourselves, how we perceive
the world is being fulfilled.
We avoid the topic.
>>NOORY: Like the plague.
>>RUBEN: Like the plague.
Absolutely.
So it takes good
self-esteem to be
able to face your own
mortality and to have
a conversation about it.
My idea is that we
should make fun of death,
laugh in the face of death.
And that gives us the
emotional distance
to be able to have the
conversations that we
need to have.
Because there are so
many decisions that
need to be made before we die.
And then if you don't
make those decisions
and have those conversations,
then your loved ones--
your spouse, your
children-- are going
to be left in charge
of doing that.
And, face it.
Would you want your kids
planning your vacation for you?
>>NOORY: No.
Of course, I don't
take many vacations.
>>RUBEN: You need to
take some vacations.
>>NOORY: How the
heck did you get
involved with studying death?
This is not something
somebody wakes up and says,
this is what I'm going
to do as a future.
And I'm sure as a little
girl, you didn't say,
I'm going to write a book called
"A Good Goodbye" about death.
How'd this happen?
>>RUBEN: Right.
I got married for the
second time in 2000
and had a very creative
Jewish Western wedding.
And everybody had
such a good time.
I wanted to write a book about
creative life cycle events
and call it "Matchings,
Hatchings, and Dispatchings."
And I got to write a book
about-- I wrote monthly columns
in my local newspaper about
weddings, births, and deaths.
And it was the columns
on funerals and death
that got the most
reader response.
So it told me
there's a real need
to be able to have
this conversation.
And humor is the way to help
break down the resistance
to having the conversation.
And it changed the
course of my career.
I went from being
public relations
professional and event planner
to a certified thanatologist,
which is a deaf educator.
Thanotology is the study of
death, dying, and bereavement.
And it comes from the
word Thanatos, which
was the twin brother and in
Greek mythology of Hypnos,
which is the demigod of sleep.
Sleep and good death.
So Hypnos and Thanatos.
>>NOORY: Why do we die?
Why can't the human body
go on almost indefinitely?
What happens?
>>RUBEN: It wears out.
There's accidents.
And anything can
happen to suddenly
you're not expecting
anyone to die,
you're just going
along living your life.
And then there's a death.
And if you haven't had
these kind of conversations
about do I want
to be buried, do I
want to be cremated, do I
want a religious funeral,
having these honest
conversations with your family
members can leave those family
members in a heap of trouble
when suddenly you're
hit by the big bus
and you go to the great
beyond in the sky.
And we need to be
able to honestly have
those conversations.
I've been talking about it for
years and I'm not dead yet.
>>NOORY: Not yet.
[LAUGHTER]
Knock on wood.
>>RUBEN: Yeah,
well-- but I know.
And I've preplanned.
Both my husband and I have.
>>NOORY: How many
people do preplan?
Not a lot.
>>RUBEN: Only about
25% of the population,
of the adult
population, actually
does advance care directives,
funeral planning, even wills.
And yet we have
100% mortality rate.
So 75% of the
population out there
is in for a very rude
surprise when death occurs.
So it really is important
to watch this show
and then say, hey,
I saw this show
and we need to have
a conversation.
>>NOORY: So when somebody
is planning their own death,
their own funeral, do
they go to a funeral home
and pick out a casket?
>>RUBEN: That's
one way to do it.
With the rise of the internet,
actually, funeral homes
are beginning to realize,
hey, I need to have
a presence on the internet.
But, yes.
The best thing to do is not just
go to one funeral home or two
funeral homes, but I
recommend going to three
because every funeral home
has a different personality,
different prices, and
different offerings.
There are your steel
caskets for the people
who think they want their
body preserved underground.
There are wooden caskets--
>>NOORY: Pine boxes.
Come on, for me.
Nice and simple.
>>RUBEN: A plain pine box.
Yeah.
Ashes to ashes, dust to dust.
That really helps facilitate
being one with the Earth.
There are even more
biodegradable options
like wicker basket
caskets, my husband
does the laundry in our
family and that's his choice.
Even wool caskets.
But also just any number-- if
you're going to be cremated,
you could even have a
cardboard box, basically,
to put into the--
>>NOORY: Yeah.
It doesn't matter.
If was at a funeral once.
And those caskets are heavy.
And you've got your
six pallbearers.
Three on each side.
And they drop the guy.
>>RUBEN: Ohh.
>>NOORY: I mean, thud.
>>NOORY: The thing was so heavy.
It was imbalanced
and stuff like that.
>>RUBEN: Well, and that's
an issue with our expanding
waistline population.
Obesity.
>>NOORY: I guess
he was heavy too.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That didn't help.
>>RUBEN: So that's extra
expensive because you have
to get an extra large casket.
You might have to have a
double wide burial plot.
If you're thinking
you might want
to choose cremation, that might
not be an option depending
on the funeral home because it's
got to be a big enough retort
to be able to accommodate
a person of that size.
>>NOORY: Isn't it a
little morbid, Gail,
to go to a funeral
and look and there's
the body laid out like that.
>>RUBEN: There are different
opinions about that.
Some people have a need to
see a dead body in a casket
to really get the message.
>>NOORY: The closure?
>>RUBEN: The not
so much closure,
but really recognize that
this person is actually dead.
Some people are very
visually oriented.
My brother-in-law,
for example, said
that he went to the
wedding of a-- wedding.
The funeral of a good
friend of the family--
>>NOORY: Well, there
could have been a wedding.
You never know.
>>RUBEN: Well, this--
>>NOORY: Sometimes a bad
wedding is like a funeral.
>>RUBEN: Right.
And, well, he
didn't see her body
so he didn't feel like
he-- he was expecting
her to walk in at any moment.
But, yes.
Weddings and funerals
are very similar events.
There are so many
decisions to make.
When is it going to happen?
Where is it going to happen?
What are you going to wear?
How are you going to
invite all the people?
And all of the people in
your life-- think about this.
Used to be we had a dog
eared personal phone book
in the kitchen that usually mom
kept that had all the contact
information for everybody in
the family and the friends.
Now we have our cellphones.
We have our Facebook friends.
There are all these different
ways of contacting people.
And if you're left
without a master
list of who these people are and
how to get in touch with them,
you could very easily overlook
a very important person
that you need to
get in touch with
to let them know
about the funeral.
>>NOORY: Sure.
In the old days
we had newspapers.
And that's where you
read the obituary column.
And you would know
where the funeral was
and how the person died
and who his relatives were
and his next of kin.
Are people reading newspapers?
Are they tracking the obits?
>>RUBEN: Well, of
course the newspapers
are undergoing a massive
change with the internet.
>>NOORY: Huge change.
>>RUBEN: So there are still the
obituary columns and our older
population are the
people who are reading
the newspapers in paper form.
We have our tablets
and the obituaries
are also appearing online.
There's a whole trend in a major
company taking these obituaries
and putting them on
their own website
and then putting
advertising next to them.
>>NOORY: Advertising?
>>RUBEN: Yes.
So--
>>NOORY: What kind of products?
>>RUBEN: I think it's
based on whatever
the person who had been
searching on the internet
was looking at previously.
That's a kind of a scary--
>>NOORY: So the Google
ads will follow them.
>>RUBEN: That's right.
They track what
you're looking at
and then we'll show
ads next to it.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
If you're looking
at beds, chances
are beds will pop up on
the obits section, right?
>>RUBEN: Right.
So you'd never know what
the ads might be for.
But another thing
about obituaries
that people need to
be aware of these days
is identity theft of the dead.
You don't want to
put too much detail
about your date of
birth, date of death,
place of birth,
mother's maiden name.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>RUBEN: Because those are--
some of those elements that
in-- an identity thief can take
and make a whole new identity
and find out yours
and then-- see,
the dead can't fight
back on identity theft.
>>NOORY: No.
And if they get their
social security number,
they keep going.
I just had a story on
Coast to Coast last week
where an individual
has pled guilty,
is going to go to
jail for a little bit,
of stealing his dead
father's identity
just to keep the social
security check coming in.
>>RUBEN: Exactly, exactly.
>>NOORY: And it
wasn't a lot of money.
It was like $8,000.
But they nailed him for that.
This must be all over the place.
>>RUBEN: Well, and
when someone dies,
reporting the death to the
social security administration
is very important
because that way
they stop sending the checks.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RUBEN: And when social
security was established
in 1937, the death
benefit for reporting
a death was $255 because that's
what a funeral cost in 1937.
>>NOORY: In those days.
Yeah.
Not anymore.
>>RUBEN: And nowadays,
that won't even
get you an obituary
in the newspaper.
So the price of the death
benefit has not gone up.
>>NOORY: I was in
the Navy nine years,
so maybe I'll do
my military thing.
They bring in honor guards with
you and a flag and all that.
That's kind of nice.
>>RUBEN: But you could also get
burial in a national cemetery
for free with a grave
space and a marker.
However, there is
still the funeral cost.
>>NOORY: Gail, I
can't believe how high
the percentage is now of people
who are getting cremated.
It's growing by
leaps and bounds.
How come?
>>RUBEN: Absolutely.
In 1985, 15% of the
population chose cremation.
And in 2015, we're up to 42%
of the population on average.
That means in Western
states it's over 60%,
even 70% of the population
choosing cremation.
Why?
Well, it's cheaper.
>>NOORY: It's cheaper.
>>RUBEN: I think that
economically it's
the main driver.
But also that we have a
more mobile population.
We don't have people wanting
to be buried in the family plot
because they don't live near
the family plot anymore.
And cremated remains
are portable.
And a lot of people
like the idea
of scattering the ashes
in a favorite place.
So there are those
different reasons.
But then there are
also good reasons
to give those remains a
permanent resting place
in a cemetery.
Cemeteries are responding
to the rise in cremation
by establishing cremation
walls, niche walls or scattering
gardens.
>>NOORY: Oh, they are?
OK.
Individuals or a grouping?
>>RUBEN: You could do either.
Some are even establishing
cremation gardens that
are beautiful walls and
shaded patios and places
with sculptures and areas where
you could actually bury the urn
and then put a
rosebush on top of it.
So literally gardens
with all sorts
of different options for putting
the remains either in a bench
or in a wall or other places.
>>NOORY: Well, and if
you could believe it,
people actually use jewelry
with some of the remains.
>>RUBEN: Oh, I see
it all the time
when I go to the funeral
director conventions.
At the expos they have jewelry
where you have a pendant
that you can unscrew and
put the remains inside.
Or a bracelet that's
like a hollow tube that
would have a hinge and you
could put cremated remains
in the ends.
There are glass artisans who
will work cremated remains
into glass jewelry or glass
paperweights or glass vases.
Many, many different options.
>>NOORY: When you cremate a
body, Gail, how widespread
are the ashes?
How much do you get?
Is it is it that much?
What do you get?
>>RUBEN: Probably about
a coffee can's worth.
>>NOORY: Coffee can.
There I am.
Right there in that coffee can.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
Five to eight pounds of cremated
remains is what you have left.
>>NOORY: Now do the
teeth burn down?
What happens?
>>RUBEN: Well, what happens is
the bones become very brittle.
And all of the flesh--
>>NOORY: God, this is morbid.
>>RUBEN: Well, it's true life.
But people need
to know about this
because if they're going
to choose cremation,
they need to know what
they're getting into.
>>NOORY: But does everything
burn down to just ash?
>>RUBEN: Just to bones.
And then they'll
sweep out the bones
and put them in what's
called a cremulator.
It's basically a big blender.
They screen out any
metal parts or fillings.
And there's some
question about how much
the mercury in your
dental fillings
goes into the atmosphere
in the cremation process.
That could be really
affecting our environment.
And if you're thinking cremation
is more environmentally
friendly than, say, taking
up space in a cemetery
with whole body burial, oh, no.
Cremation does have
a carbon footprint.
The average size person--
>>NOORY: My, my.
>>RUBEN: --being cremated
in a natural gas retort,
is what the machine is
called, generates 532 pounds
of CO2, greenhouse gases.
And to put that
in perspective, I
have solar panels on my house.
And a system that tells
me how much CO2 I'm
offsetting by generating
electricity from the sun.
In sunny New Mexico
where I live,
I would have to run my
solar panels for 14 days
to offset one cremation.
And in northern climates or
places where it's not as sunny,
it would take a month
to offset one cremation.
So it does have a
carbon footprint.
And more than a million people
a year in the United States
alone are getting cremated.
>>NOORY: How long does it
take to cremate a body?
>>RUBEN: Depending on the
unit and the size of the body,
it could be anywhere
from two to five hours.
>>NOORY: That long?
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
Yeah.
And then there are
other-- there's
a new trend coming on
the scene that people
will be hearing more about
called alkaline hydrolysis.
>>NOORY: What the heck is that?
>>RUBEN: That is also
called flameless cremation.
It's basically putting the body
into a tank with lye and water
and bringing it up to
temperature and pressure.
And it speeds up the process
of decomposition naturally.
>>NOORY: It just
breaks down the body?
>>RUBEN: Breaks down the body.
>>NOORY: This is
like a "Breaking Bad"
episode where they dump--
>>RUBEN: Yes, although--
>>NOORY: --the body of that
poor unfortunate kid in a vat.
>>RUBEN: Well, they did
it with somebody else too.
But that was actually
acid, not alkaline.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>RUBEN: So different--
>>NOORY: But it
does the same thing?
>>RUBEN: Same thing.
The body is broken down
into the components
of life, kind of a coffee
colored sterile liquid, which
actually makes great fertilizer.
But it's usually just
flushed down the drain.
And the bones remain
and become very sandy.
So that becomes the remains
that are given to the family.
And that process actually
gives you more cremated remains
at the end.
>>NOORY: Why are so many
cultures different with death?
Some are happy.
Some are sad.
The Irish love the
drink after at a wake.
How come they're all different?
>>RUBEN: Well, we're
all different societies.
I think some societies
have a better understanding
and acceptance of death.
We've become a very
death denying society
in the United States.
And we think medical care
is going to keep us alive
and stave off the grim
reaper for forever.
But we do have a
100% mortality rate.
I think it's the fact
that we're getting away
from actually doing funerals
and just trying to make it
a celebration is a good
and a bad development.
Because when we take the
time to acknowledge it,
we can incorporate that
change in our lives.
If we pretend that, oh, we're
just going to have a party
and we're not going to cry about
somebody-- losing somebody we
love, that is not
moving the process along
to bring the
acknowledgment of that loss
within our heart and our mind.
I think when you have people
who-- the Irish wake is
actually part of the
Catholic tradition of washing
and dressing the body
and being with the body.
We have very little chance
to naturally be with the body
unless we're doing
our own home funerals.
And that is a possibility
within the United States
in many states.
There about seven
states that require
you to have the involvement of a
funeral home when someone dies.
But you could do it yourself.
>>NOORY: You can't bury
from your relatives
in your backyard?
>>RUBEN: If you had enough
property and the zoning
laws allowed it, you could.
But we've gotten
used to the idea
of, well, let's just-- the
doctors couldn't fix grandma.
So now she's off to the funeral
home and we don't see grandma
either at all or we see
her laid out the casket.
And when the spirit
leaves the body.
If you've ever been
with somebody who--
>>NOORY: So you do believe
in life after death?
>>RUBEN: I personally do.
Yes.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
And I was with my father-in-law.
Our whole family was
there in the hospital room
with him when--
>>NOORY: When he died.
>>RUBEN: --he died.
>>NOORY: Did you see
anything strange?
>>RUBEN: It wasn't
visible, but what
did change is that when
he was still breathing
he looked like my father-in-law.
After he stopped breathing
and was just laying there,
the body, without the animating
spirit, it was a shell.
And I could definitely
see the difference.
>>NOORY: Well, it's not
fun dealing with a dying
person in the family.
I've had to go
through it twice now.
One expected, one really not.
It's not fun.
>>RUBEN: No.
And that's why it's important
to plan before there's
that unexpected event
or the illnesses
really progressing
along with a loved one.
My motto is talking about
sex won't make you pregnant.
Talking about funerals
won't make you dead.
And when you can plan ahead, you
can laugh in the face of death.
And it makes it that
much easier when
the time does come
that you've already
at least put plans in place.
People know what's
expected because death
is the great unknown.
There is this tarot
card of death.
The tarot card of death
does not mean literal death.
It means change and
transition and transformation.
And the unknown.
We're afraid of death because
we're afraid of the unknown.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RUBEN: We don't know
what comes afterwards.
So being prepared at least
with having conversations
about what kind of
arrangements you
would like to make with
your deceased body really
helps the family, the
loved ones, deal with it.
So taking care of
that before you've
got a dying person on
your hands really helps.
>>NOORY: What's
interesting, though,
Gail, is when you're younger,
when you're 10 years old,
you don't even
think about death.
When you're 25--
>>RUBEN: You don't.
>>NOORY: You don't
think about death.
When you're 40, not a lot.
All of sudden when you're
in your late 50s or your 60s
and you realize that
you're on the home stretch,
you begin to think
about it a lot.
But you kind of tuck
it away somewhere.
I know even in my
own life, I know
one day it's going to happen.
It's inevitable.
I just don't know when.
Is it tomorrow?
Is a 20 years from now?
Who knows?
But you're right.
You do need to plan.
But a lot of people don't.
They put it off.
They put it off and
then it's too late.
>>RUBEN: Exactly.
Then it's too late
to be prepared.
It falls to the bottom
of the to do list.
And that's why I
go out there and I
talk to people about
funeral planning.
I use humor and funny films.
>>NOORY: Who do you talk to?
>>RUBEN: I go to churches.
I go to community groups.
I talk to Funeral
Directors Associations.
>>NOORY: Are people receptive
when you're talking?
Do they ask
questions about this?
>>RUBEN: Absolutely.
I'm was a pioneer of
the Death Cafe movement
in the United States.
>>NOORY: What is the Death Cafe?
>>RUBEN: This comes to us
from the United Kingdom.
A gentleman named
John Underwood,
based on the work of a Swiss
sociologist named Bernard
Crettaz, he held these events
called Cafe Mortel where people
would come together and
drink coffee and tea
and eat cake and cookies.
So the food and drink is
an important comfort aspect
of talking about
mortality issues.
>>NOORY: Another
thing for Starbucks
to come up with, right?
>>RUBEN: Well, yeah.
You can have them anywhere.
And I've had them in cafes.
I've had them in my own home.
I want to actually work with
our local funeral homes that
have meeting centers,
social halls basically,
to hold them there
because that's
the next step, is
you're going to deal
with the funeral director.
>>NOORY: What do they do?
>>RUBEN: We sit around and we
talk about mortality issues.
>>NOORY: Oh, how nice.
>>RUBEN: Well, it's quite
fun in a number of regards.
>>NOORY: Fun?
>>RUBEN: Fun, yeah.
We laugh.
There's laughter.
>>NOORY: You have a strange
of humor, don't you?
>>RUBEN: No.
It's very enlightening to let
those concerns about mortality
out and share them
with other people.
There's no agenda.
But usually the conversation
falls into four categories.
Talking about material
issues, spiritual issues,
medical issues,
and control issues.
Really Baby Boomers are big
on wanting to control things.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RUBEN: And so we'll talk
about things like physician aid
in dying, advanced
medical directives, wills,
all of these other things.
But with the Death
Cafe movement,
these are people who are
willing to come out and talk
about these things.
When I go out and
speak to groups,
I'll usually have
a presentation that
involves funny film clips
because humor helps break down
that resistance.
>>NOORY: What are the clips of?
>>RUBEN: From comedies.
From films like--
>>NOORY: Oh, movies
and things like that?
>>RUBEN: Movies.
And TV shows.
"Undertaking Betty."
I don't know if you remember
the Chuckles Bites the Dust
episode from "The
Mary Tyler Moore Show"
where she laughs at
the clown's funeral.
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>RUBEN: "Elizabethtown."
There are a whole range
of actually comedy films
that involve scenes
involving funerals.
And I use clips from those.
I have a license to use
film clips in my talks.
And then we can laugh.
The endorphins get into
your system when you laugh.
>>NOORY: Does anybody cry?
>>RUBEN: Not really.
It opens the door to having
the conversation about all
of these different
details about funeral
planning that you need to know.
It's the party no
one wants to plan.
And it does have hundreds of
decisions that need to be made.
And if you haven't talked about
it and made those decisions,
it makes it that
much harder, not
if but when, it does happen.
>>NOORY: See I think
when somebody dies,
Gail, in their 80s,
it's a good run.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: No need to get upset.
Really no need to cry.
It was a great run.
Part of living is dying.
That's a great run.
Somebody guys in their
40s and 50s, that's sad.
>>RUBEN: Mm-hmm.
But we need to have memorial
services and funerals.
They could be upbeat.
A good goodbye
incorporates the four R's
in any good memorial service.
Number one, we recognize
that somebody has died.
Number two, we
remember the person.
This is where we tell stories.
This is where we get
laughter and tears.
Number three, we
reaffirm our beliefs,
whatever those beliefs might be.
And then number four, we release
the spirit of the deceased.
We say, you go your
way, we'll go our way.
And that enables the living
to have some sense of closure,
some sense of processing.
But bear in mind,
grief does not stop.
The grief journey is just
starting with a funeral.
>>NOORY: Now when we
talk about when funerals,
what's the preparation
that's involved?
On the back of my
driver's license,
for example, there's
a little check.
I could if, God forbid,
I die tragically
or in a car accident, it
says, take my body parts
and use them the
way you want to.
Give somebody my eyes.
Give somebody my kidney.
Your liver.
>>RUBEN: Heart.
>>NOORY: Whatever.
Is that happening a lot?
Donating body parts or your body
to university or other places?
>>RUBEN: Those are two
different programs.
When you check your I want
to donate my organs should
I die in a car accident, they
will take your organs out.
And then your family has
to deal with either burial
or cremation.
If you donate your body
to a medical program
at a university, they
will take the body
and hold onto it for
perhaps up to two years.
And then cremate the remains
and return them to the family
all at no cost to the family.
However, if they have
enough cadavers when you die
or if you have certain
medical conditions
like infectious diseases
or grossly overweight
or underweight or
maybe there was
too much trauma
to the body, they
don't have to accept the body.
And then you need
to have a plan B
for if you do want a free
cremation from donating
your body to science.
And there are national
services that will do that.
MedCure, Life
Legacy, Science Care
are just a couple of these
services that are credentialed.
You want to make sure they're
credential because there
has been some underhanded
dealings in the body donation
industry.
So look for a credential
by the American Tissue Bank
Association.
>>NOORY: Jeez, they have
associations for everything.
>>RUBEN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Generally,
what does funeral cost
compared to a cremation?
>>RUBEN: Depending on where you
live a funeral with a burial
could be anywhere from
$7,000 to $20,000.
>>NOORY: Really?
That high?
>>RUBEN: Yes.
>>NOORY: That's a lot for
family to have to pay.
>>RUBEN: Exactly.
And if you haven't thought about
this and realized just how much
what the cost is, this
is why we have cremation
being so much more
growing in popularity
because of economic conditions.
A direct cremation could be
anywhere from $1,000 to $2,000,
$3,000.
>>NOORY: That's doable
for a lot of people.
>>RUBEN: Right.
And then--
>>NOORY: Is that a
reason why it's growing?
The cost?
>>RUBEN: I believe so.
Yeah.
And our mobility as a society.
That we don't live where
we grew up anymore.
And maybe we don't have
any kind of tie to being
buried in a particular place.
>>NOORY: In the
Saint Louis area,
they've indicted
does some people who
were running an insurance
funeral scam where they
collected money for
insurance policies
for people who had died.
And they were supposed
to cover the funeral.
It never happened.
>>RUBEN: I remember that.
I wrote about that in the book.
Depending on what
state you live in--
>>NOORY: These people
were neighbors to me.
>>RUBEN: Oh, no.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
Well, and since
that time there are
a number of-- what you want
to do when you go to pre-plan
is buy a policy that is an
insurance policy that will
cover the cost of the funeral.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>RUBEN: Now there
are differences.
>>NOORY: That's like a little
life insurance policy, right?
>>RUBEN: Right.
>>NOORY: For like $10,000.
>>RUBEN: There's final
expense insurance that
would pay the family the money.
And I that be anywhere
from $3,000 to $30,000.
>>NOORY: What's the policy?
$20 a month maybe?
>>RUBEN: It depends
how old you are.
>>NOORY: It's not a lot.
Right.
>>RUBEN: So the older you
are, the more expensive
it's going to be.
>>NOORY: The more
expensive it is.
Sure.
>>RUBEN: But if you do a
policy with a funeral home,
either you're going to
pre-plan in a state that
has trusts, a funeral
trust, so the money
is held by the trust,
not the funeral home.
Because funeral homes get
bought out by corporations.
>>NOORY: Or they go under.
>>RUBEN: Or they
go out of business.
Right.
>>NOORY: Good point.
>>RUBEN: So you don't give your
money just to the funeral home
because it can go
away like that.
And then unfortunately
with that insurance scam,
unfortunately that put
a bad mark on insurance
with funeral planning.
>>NOORY: It sure did.
>>RUBEN: However, there are
a number of major insurance
companies now that
funeral homes work
with so that you buy
an insurance policy,
you're keeping that money.
But the beneficiary would
be the funeral home.
So that--
>>NOORY: Right.
Goes straight to them.
>>RUBEN: And one of the
benefits of planning
that way is the
funeral home will
lock in today's prices for
whatever funeral you arrange.
>>NOORY: Do you have space,
Gail, for burying people?
I've always wondered about that.
Where land, vital land, is
taken up with cemeteries.
>>RUBEN: But they're
beautiful, green spaces.
And think about this.
Walmart keeps building
more Walmarts.
And they're huge parking lots.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>RUBEN: Would you rather see a
Walmart or would you rather see
a cemetery with nice green
spaces you could go jogging
in and walk your dog and--
>>NOORY: Probably me, I'd
probably like to see a Walmart.
I wouldn't want to live
next to a cemetery.
How far back do you
think burials have gone?
>>RUBEN: In history?
>>NOORY: Do we have data where
the cavemen, Neanderthals--
>>RUBEN: Oh, yes.
>>NOORY: That they
buried their dead?
>>RUBEN: I'm thinking
like 5,000 years.
And you would have bodies
being buried with items.
So I think that
people were thinking,
they're going on
a trip and we're
going to bury them with stuff so
they have their stuff when they
get to wherever they're going.
>>NOORY: Look what
the Egyptians did.
>>RUBEN: The
Egyptians, the Vikings.
In fact, Viking funerals on film
are really Hollywood depictions
of putting the body on a boat--
>>NOORY: That's where they
kind of-- and burn it.
And burn it.
>>RUBEN: And burning
it on the water.
They did put bodies
on boats, but they
would take the boats out of the
water and burn them on land.
>>NOORY: Ah.
>>RUBEN: Or they would take the
boats out of the water and dig
graves, put the boat
with all the stuff--
>>NOORY: In there.
>>RUBEN: --and the
body in the grave.
And that's how they
actually recovered
quite a number of artifacts
in Norway and Sweden.
>>NOORY: Gail, in
your career what
is the strangest funeral
you've ever heard about?
>>RUBEN: I have attended
a number of funerals.
I did a project called
My 30 Funerals in 30 Days
where I blogged about funerals
that I just showed up at that I
picked out of the obituaries.
I always got--
>>NOORY: Were you welcome?
>>RUBEN: I asked permission
before I would do that.
>>NOORY: Oh, OK.
>>RUBEN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Good.
>>RUBEN: It's kind of strange to
have somebody-- I would show up
and say, I'd like to honor
your loved ones by writing
about today's funeral.
Would that be OK?
And everybody said yes.
Usually one out of 30 said no.
But I did go to a
funeral for a biker.
A biker funeral.
The Banditos Motorcycle Club
actually paid for the funeral.
So they were out in
force in their colors.
>>NOORY: 100 bikes.
>>RUBEN: It was 78 bikes.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>RUBEN: And they
did do a road trip.
His casket was pulled by a
trike hearse in a glass--
the casket in a glass box.
They put stickers on his
casket for the different clubs.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>RUBEN: But it was
a beautiful service.
They sang "Amazing Grace."
They showed pictures of
this guy throughout his life
as his tattoos multiplied
and his multiple--
>>NOORY: See, these
things are for the living.
>>RUBEN: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
>>NOORY: I think.
Aren't they?
That's what funerals are for.
For the living people.
The guy who's dead, he's gone.
>>RUBEN: So planning
ahead for your loved ones
and letting them know
what you would like done
and even taking the step of
going to the funeral home
and making your arrangements,
you can put your preferences
on file and not pre-pay.
That's what my husband
and I have done.
But the information is there.
That's the other part of the
confusion and the stress.
There's so much
information that needs
to be pulled together to
be filed for the death
certificate.
And where are all
the important papers?
So being organized
in that regard,
there are a lot of people
who are not organized
in their life in general.
But it's especially
important for end of life
to at least pull that kind
of information together.
So planning ahead reduces
stress at a time of grief.
It reduces family conflict
because everybody's
got their own opinion
about what Mom or Dad would
have wanted if Mom or
Dad didn't explicitly
say what they wanted.
It can save you
money because you
realize how much
is going to cost
and you figure out
a way to cover it.
And then you can talk
about a good goodbye.
>>NOORY: What's
your website, Gail?
>>RUBEN: agoodgoodbye.com.
>>NOORY: I love it.
And of course, the book
is "A Good Goodbye,"
which is a good, good read to
learn about funerals and death
and dying and cremation.
I think it's important.
It's important.
It's a process.
It's part of living.
We're not going to escape it.
I wish we could.
Maybe one day they'll download
our memories onto a chip
and they'll clone our bodies
and we'll download it back in.
Maybe we'll live
forever that way, huh?
>>RUBEN: I think
we do live forever.
We just don't remember it.
>>NOORY: We just move on to
another plane or existence.
>>RUBEN: We move on.
Exactly.
>>NOORY: Gail, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>RUBEN: Thank you.
>>NOORY: OK.
You really don't have anything
to worry about in the death
and dying process.
But you really do need to plan.
And I hope some of the
messages from Gail Ruben
today helped you just to
think ahead a little bit.
Because it's going to happen.
I'm George Noory and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]